## Pure php plugin for protoc

The `protoc`, better known as the protobuf compiler, does not generate code for your favorite programming language by default,
but it provides the ability to do so via plugins. Although a plugin for PHP already exists, it generates rather outdated PHP code,
using setters, getters, inheritance, and other obsolete practices that are no longer considered acceptable for DTOs (which is exactly what protobuf messages are).
For this reason, we have written this plugin, which — in addition to addressing the issues mentioned above — is also necessary for generating
`gRPC` code based on non-blocking PHP (currently using `amphp` ecosystem).

### Contents
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Plugin options](#plugin-options)
  - [src_path](#src_path)
  - [grpc](#grpc)
- [Generated libraries](#generated-libraries)
- [Feature matrix](#feature-matrix)

### Usage

To use the plugin, you need to install the compiled phar archive of the required version from the [release page](https://github.com/thesis-php/protoc-plugin/releases) using `curl`.
For example, you can do this when building a Docker image.

1. First of all, you must install the required version of protoc itself:
```dockerfile
ARG PROTOC_VERSION=32.1
ARG PROTOC_PLUGIN_VERSION=0.1.4

RUN apk add --no-cache curl unzip && \
    curl -LO "https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/releases/download/v${PROTOC_VERSION}/protoc-${PROTOC_VERSION}-linux-x86_64.zip" && \
    unzip "protoc-${PROTOC_VERSION}-linux-x86_64.zip" -d /usr/local && \
    rm "protoc-${PROTOC_VERSION}-linux-x86_64.zip"
```

2. After that, install the plugin:
```dockerfile
RUN curl -L https://github.com/thesis-php/protoc-plugin/releases/download/${PROTOC_PLUGIN_VERSION}/protoc-gen-php \
    -o /usr/local/bin/protoc-gen-php \
    && chmod +x /usr/local/bin/protoc-gen-php
```

Now you can use the plugin just as you did before. For example, to generate code for all files from the `protos/` folder and place it in the `genproto/` folder, you can use the following command:
```shell
protoc \
  --plugin=protoc-gen-php-plugin=/usr/local/bin/protoc-gen-php \
  protos/*.proto \
  --php-plugin_out=genproto
```

Let's assume that the `protos/` folder contains a `request.proto` file with the following schema:
```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

package thesis.api;

message Request {
    string id = 1;
}
```

After running the generation command, a `Thesis/Api` folder containing the `Request.php` class will appear in the `genproto/` directory:
```php
<?php

/**
 * Code generated by thesis/protoc-plugin. DO NOT EDIT.
 * Versions:
 *   thesis/protoc-plugin — v0.1.2
 *   protoc               — v6.32.1
 * Source: protos/request.proto
 */

declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Thesis\Api;

use Thesis\Protobuf\Reflection;

/**
 * @api
 */
final readonly class Request
{
    public function __construct(
        #[Reflection\Field(1, Reflection\StringT::T)]
        public string $id = '',
    ) {}
}
```

After generating the code, you must install the [thesis/protobuf](https://github.com/thesis-php/protobuf) library, if you haven't done so already, which is responsible for serializing and deserializing protobuf messages.

### Plugin options

To extend the plugin's behaviour, cli options are used.

### `src_path`

If you are generating code within an application, you most likely want to place it in the `genproto/` or `generated/` folder
at the same level as your application code (which is typically stored in your `src/` or `app/` folder).
In this case, you would want the code to be placed in a folder that reflects the full namespace.
For example, if the proto schema specifies the option `option php_namespace = "Thesis\\Api"` or the package name `package thesis.api`,
all messages within this schema will be placed in the `genproto/Thesis/Api/*` folder.

However, if you want to generate the code and later vendor it as a package, you can place all the code in the `src/` folder
and configure autoloading via composer without creating unnecessary nesting. To achieve this, you can use the `src_path` option with a dot (.) as its value:
```shell
protoc \
  --plugin=protoc-gen-php-plugin=/usr/local/bin/protoc-gen-php \
  protos/*.proto \
  --php-plugin_out=src_path=.:src
```

### `grpc`

Our plugin can generate not only protobuf messages, but also the client and server for `gRPC` services.
If you do not want to generate `gRPC` code, you can disable this behavior using the `grpc=none` option:
```shell
protoc \
  --plugin=protoc-gen-php-plugin=/usr/local/bin/protoc-gen-php \
  protos/*.proto \
  --php-plugin_out=grpc=none:genproto
```

If you want to generate only the client code, use `grpc=client`:
```shell
protoc \
  --plugin=protoc-gen-php-plugin=/usr/local/bin/protoc-gen-php \
  protos/*.proto \
  --php-plugin_out=grpc=client:genproto
```

To generate only the server code, use `grpc=server`. By default, and when passing `grpc=client,server`, both the client and server will be generated.

### Generated libraries

The protobuf ecosystem has many well-defined types for various tasks, including the so-called [well-known types](https://protobuf.dev/reference/protobuf/google.protobuf/), which include `Timestamp`, `Duration`, `Empty`, and many others.
To avoid having to generate these types each time, it is recommended to use libraries where this code has already been generated.

[`thesis/protobuf-known-types`](https://github.com/thesis-php/protobuf-known-types) — generated well-known types.

[`thesis/google-types`](https://github.com/thesis-php/google-types) — generated types from the `google/type` package, which include, for example, `Money`, `Color`, `PhoneNumber`, and many others.

[`thesis/googleapis-rpc-types`](https://github.com/thesis-php/googleapis-rpc-types) — it is primarily used by [gRPC](https://github.com/thesis-php/grpc) itself, as it contains types for status and errors.

[`thesis/protobuf-descriptor-types`](https://github.com/thesis-php/protobuf-descriptor-types) — types used by the plugin itself and for implementing so-called server reflection.

[`thesis/protobuf-compiler-types`](https://github.com/thesis-php/protobuf-compiler-types) — types used for communication between protoc and its plugins.

### Feature matrix
- [x] `proto2`
- [x] `proto3`
- [x] `proto2 scalar defaults`
- [ ] `proto2 enum defaults`
- [x] `proto3 optional`
- [ ] `extensions`
- [ ] `groups`
- [x] `nested types`
- [x] `packed repeated`
- [x] `oneof`
- [x] `grpc`
- [x] `client streaming`
- [x] `server streaming`
- [x] `bidirectional streaming`
- [x] `option php_namespace`
- [ ] `option php_class_prefix`
- [ ] `option php_metadata_namespace`
- [x] `comments`
